# Iterator

**Iterator** - an object that points to a value within a given sequence.

Basic actions common to all iterators:

- get the corresponding value;
- move to the next element in the sequence (more precisely, to the next iterator).
  - or indicate that the elements have ended.

## Iterator and Pointer

In essence, an iterator is a generalization of the idea of a **pointer** to a value in memory. If you consider memory as a sequence of cells, this generalization becomes more logical.

From this, one can also conclude that you can use an iterator not only for direct iteration over a sequence but also for storing a "pointer to an element in the sequence".

## Iterator and Index

In fact, an index is the simplest example of an iterator - a single integer.

It is easy to notice that all the operations described above are defined for an index:

- getting the corresponding value is done by `operator[](index)`;
- moving to the next element is dony by `index++`;
- there are no more elements when `index == size`.

## Iterating through an Iterator

Any sequence usually has functionality to obtain an iterator pointing to the **first element** in the traversal.

Therefore, the general approach can be written as follows:

```
Iterator it = iterator(sequence);
while (true)
{
  Value value = value(it);
  // process(value)

  if (finished(it)) break;
  it = next(it);
}
```

However, different programming languages may implement this template in completely different ways.

In this lecture, we will take a detailed look at iterators in C++ and briefly familiarize ourselves with iterators in Java and Python.

### Foreach

Often, languages provide syntactic sugar for iterating through sequences by modifying the `for` loop.

This construct is called `for-each` and generally looks something like this:

```
for-each (Value value in sequence)
{
  // process(value)
}
```

Most often, the `for-each` syntax turns out to be much simpler than explicit iteration through an iterator.

## Invalidating Iterators

In the most basic case, an iterator must correctly point to the current element and also be able to accurately determine the next element in the order of traversal.

From this, two facts follow:

- It is **not guaranteed** that iterators for **already viewed** elements will be valid.
- It is **not guaranteed** that **changing the structure of the sequence** during iteration will maintain the validity of the current iterator.

The second fact is particularly important, as it can often lead to unexpected effects.

Different types of sequences provide some additional guarantees and/or allow certain types of modifications.

But in general, it is **not recommended** to implement an algorithm that modifies the structure of sequences during iteration with an iterator (including `for-each` loops).