# Priority Queue

## Generalization of Queue

Previously, you have encountered a **queue** - an abstraction of a data structure that implements sequential data processing.

But is it always necessary to process data in the same order they are added?

### Priority Processing Order

For example, in a hospital, there may be a queue for a procedure, but urgent cases will push less priority cases aside.

Or you may plan your tasks for the day in the morning, but during the day, urgent tasks (with higher priority) will arise that you will start to address, bypassing the planned tasks.

In the examples above, we used the concept of **priority** - an abstract quantity associated with data that affects the processing order.

One can consider that data is processed in **ordered manner relative to priority**. This does not necessarily have to be from higher priority to lower: for instance, you may do homework from the quickest to the longest.

### Generalization of Operations

In fact, even the operations of a "regular" queue `add_back` and `remove_front` contain an implicit priority: data is processed in the order of **increasing addition time**.

All of this leads us to the concept of a **priority queue**, which supports the following operations:

- `add(value, priority)` - add a value with a given priority.
- `extremum()` and `extract_extremum()` - get / remove the value with the highest priority.

#### Implicit Priority

It can be noted that priority is essentially very similar to the concept of a sorting key.

Therefore, many programming languages that implement a priority queue often do not pass priority as a separate parameter (instead of `push(value, priority)`, it is simply implemented as `push(value)`).

In such cases, the "most prioritized" value is understood as either the minimum or the maximum relative to the given comparator.

## Implementation via Search Tree

As you have already understood, a priority queue is an abstraction that can have various implementations.

In the previous lecture, we discussed search trees - it is easy to notice that they are quite suitable for this case:

- adding a value remains the same;
- the extremum in this case is either `first()` or `last()`.
  - removing the extremum in this case is performed through the standard tree deletion operation.

### Common Drawbacks of This Approach

Most search trees are built on nodes with recursive operations, which can negatively affect the final efficiency.

Moreover, a search tree is primarily designed for searching values within itself, while priority queues do not need this.

It turns out that we incur additional overhead for the ability to perform operations that are simply irrelevant to us.