# C++

## `std::priority_queue`

C++ contains an implementation of a priority queue **for maximum** via a binary heap.

Similar to search trees and sorting, it expects a template parameter `Compare = std::less<T>` for performing comparison operations.

For example, if a **minimum** heap is required, one can use `std::greater<T>`.

### Basic Operations

- `push(value)` / `emplace` - adding a value;
- `push_range(begin, end)` - adding a sequence;
- `top()` - accessing the extremum;
- `pop()` - removing the extremum.

### Wrapper Class

Similar to `std::queue`, `std::priority_queue` is a class adapter for an internal container.

The container class is passed through the template parameter `Container = std::vector<T>` and must contain the following operations:

- `front()`;
- `push_back(value)`;
- `pop_back()`.

Also, the container's iterators must satisfy the "Random access" requirement.

It is easy to notice that besides `std::vector`, all these requirements are met by `std::deque`. On the other hand, `std::list`, while containing all operations, does not meet the "Random access" criteria.

It is important to note that the template parameter `Compare` is actually created not as `std::less<T>`, but as `std::less<typename Container::value_type>`.

# Java

## `PriorityQueue`

Java contains an implementation of a priority queue **for minimum** via a binary heap based on an array.

Similar to search trees and sorting, it expects a type parameter `Comparator` or an implementation of the `Comparable` interface for the value type for correct internal comparisons.

### Basic Operations

- `add(value)` - adding a value;
- `addAll(collection)` - adding a sequence;
- `peek()` - accessing the extremum;
- `poll()` - removing the extremum.

# Python

## `heapq`

Unlike C++ or Java, Python does not contain a separate class for a priority queue.

Instead, Python uses a procedural approach. The `heapq` package contains several functions for modifying data arrays that satisfy the heap property.

### Basic Operations

- `heapify(values)` - building a heap from a list of values "in-place" in $O(N)$;
  - an empty heap is created via `[]`.
- `heap[0]` - accessing the extremum.
- `heappush(heap, value)` - adding a value;
- `heappop(heap)` - removing the extremum;
- `heappushpop(heap, value)` - add a value and remove the extremum (more efficient than `heappush` + `heappop`);
- `heapreplace(heap, value)` - remove the extremum and add a value (more efficient than `heappop` + `heappush`).