# Applications

## K-th Order Statistic Online

The $K$-th **order statistic** of a sequence is the value that stands at the $K$-th position after sorting in ascending order.

### Statement

Given an integer $K$ and $Q$ queries "add value $v$".

After each query, output the $K$-th order statistic (if there are $K$ or more values available).

### Idea of Solution

Notice that this task is very similar to the task of "inserting at the $K$-th position in a queue".

We will maintain a priority queue **for maximum** with a size of no more than $K$.

If, after adding a value, the size of the queue becomes strictly greater than $K$, we will remove the maximum element.

Thus, the $K$-th order statistic will always be at the top of the sought queue.

### Example Implementation in C++

```cpp
void push(T value) {
  top_heap.push(value);

  if (top_heap.size() > k) {
    top_heap.pop();
  }
}
```

## K-th Order Statistic Online with Removals

### Statement

Given an integer $K$ and $Q$ queries "add value $v$" or "remove previously added value $v$".

After each query, output the $K$-th order statistic (if there are $K$ or more values available).

### Idea of Solution

We will apply the idea from the previous task but add a second priority queue **for minimum** - it will store statistics with indices $(K + 1)$ and higher.

In this case, when the size of the first queue exceeds $K$, the maximum element is not removed but transferred to the second queue.

If the removal request needs to delete a value from the first queue, the minimum element from the second queue is transferred to it.

Thus, the $K$-th order statistic will always be at the top of the first queue.
