# Data Ordering

Previously, we studied ways to store and enumerate data - data structures and iterators.

However, in some cases, data must be **ordered** in a specific way before processing begins.

Ordering can be performed in two modes:

- data remains in the same storage (the so-called **_in-place_**)
- data is copied to new storage, which is then ordered.

## Reversal

The simplest way to reorder data is to change the order of processing to the opposite (`reverse`).

In most cases, reversal can be performed in-place:

- Two iterators `left` and `right` are used, initially pointing to the first and last elements.
- At each iteration step, the values at the iterators are swapped, after which `left` is incremented, and `right` is decremented.
- The iteration continues until `left` points to an element "to the left" of the `right` iterator.

### Implementation

Example of reversing an array in C++:

```cpp
for (size_t left = 0, right = a.size() - 1; left < right; ++left, --right)
{
  std::swap(a[left], a[right]);
}
```

## Sorting

In most situations, data needs to be rearranged in a more complex way than simple reversal.

In such cases, it makes sense to talk about **sorting** data relative to a given **strict order relation**.

### Order Relation

#### Strict Order Relation

Let's define a boolean function (predicate) $F(x, y)$, defined for all possible values of the array $A$.

The function $F$ is called a **strict order relation** - analogous to the operation " $x < y$ " if:

- $\neg{F(x, x)}$ ($\neg$ - logical negation) - _antireflexivity_.
- from $F(x, y)$ it follows that $\neg{F(y, x)}$ - _antisymmetry_.
- from $F(x, y)$ and $F(y, z)$ it follows that $F(x, z)$ - _transitivity_.

#### Equality of Elements Relative to the Order Relation

From the strict order relation $F$, we can also define the relation of **equivalence** (equality) $G(x, y)$ of values:

$G(x, y) = \neg{F(x, y)} \land \neg{F(y, x)}$ ($\land$ - logical "AND").

In this case, the following conditions apply to $G$:

- $G(x, x)$ - _reflexivity_.
- from $G(x, y)$ it follows that $G(y, x)$ - _symmetry_.
- from $G(x, y)$ and $G(y, z)$ it follows that $G(x, z)$ - _transitivity_.

Essentially, in the case of equivalence of values $x$ and $y$, their order relative to each other is not defined.

#### Sorting Relative to the Order Relation

An array $A$ is considered **sorted** relative to the order relation $F$ if for any $i > 1$ it holds that

- ${F(A_{i - 1}, A_i)}$ - **strict** ordering.
- $\neg{F(A_i, A_{i - 1})}$ - **non-strict** ordering.

#### Comparison Key

In some cases, the concept of a "**sorting key**" $K(x)$ is encountered - a value by which elements need to be compared instead of the original values.

For example, when using databases/table managers (Excel, Google Sheets), you can sort data by a specific column/columns.

At this moment, you essentially introduce a comparator that compares values in those columns instead of entire rows of the table.

### Lexicographic Order Relation

In the case of multiple sorting keys $K_1, K_2, \dots, K_m$, the concept of **lexicographic** order is introduced.

There are two main cases for using lexicographic order:

- a complex object having multiple attributes for comparison.
- an object that is a sequence of data.

You have probably encountered such an order (more often than you might think) - for string data, this order is often called "**alphabetical**".

#### Operating Principle for Objects with a Set of Attributes

Suppose you have two objects $a$ and $b$, each defined by a set of keys $K_1, K_2, \dots, K_m$.

In this case, comparison in lexicographic order is performed as follows:

- if $K_1(a) \ne K_1(b)$ - then the result of the comparison is determined by comparing keys $K_1$.
- (otherwise) if $K_2(a) \ne K_2(b)$ - then the result of the comparison is determined by comparing keys $K_2$.
- (otherwise) if $K_3(a) \ne K_3(b)$ - then the result of the comparison is determined by comparing keys $K_3$.
- $\dots$
- (otherwise) if $K_m(a) \ne K_m(b)$ - then the result of the comparison is determined by comparing keys $K_m$.
- (otherwise) if all $m$ keys are equivalent, then objects $a$ and $b$ are considered equivalent.

Example implementation in C++:

```cpp
auto cmp_1 = compare(a.key_1, b.key_1);
if (cmp_1 != equal) return cmp_1;

auto cmp_2 = compare(a.key_2, b.key_2);
if (cmp_2 != equal) return cmp_2;

// ...

return compare(a.key_m, b.key_m);
```

#### Operating Principle for Sequences of Data

If objects $a$ and $b$ are sequences of data, the principle remains the same.

In this case, the key $K_i$ is the $i$-th value in the corresponding sequence.

Additionally, the "prefix" rule is introduced:

- let the length of $a$ be $L_a$, the length of $b$ be $L_b$, and $L_a < L_b$ (the case $L_a > L_b$ is analogous).
- let sequences $a$ and $b$ be equivalent for all elements from the 1st to the $L_a$-th inclusive.
- in this case, sequence $a$ is a **prefix** of sequence $b$ and is considered **lexicographically less** than $b$.

Example implementation in C++:

```cpp
size_t a_len = a.size(), b_len = b.size();
for (size_t i = 0; i < std::min(a_len, b_len); ++i)
{
  auto cmp = compare(a[i], b[i]);
  if (cmp != equal) return cmp;
}

return compare(a_len, b_len);
```

In fact, it can be noted that comparing objects with multiple attributes is essentially unfolding this loop into a set of sequential instructions (due to the fixed number of attributes).

### Stability of Sorting

Sorting is called **stable** if it preserves the relative order of equivalent elements.

Some sorting algorithms are inherently stable.

At the same time, any unstable sort can be turned into a stable one by transforming the data:

- suppose it is necessary to sort an array $A$.
- we construct a new array $B$, where $B_i = (A_i, i)$ - a pair of values.
- we sort array $B$ using lexicographic comparison:
  - if $A_i \ne A_j$ - the corresponding elements $B_i$ and $B_j$ will be sorted in the same order.
  - if $A_i = A_j$, then $B_i$ and $B_j$ will be ordered according to the comparison of $i$ and $j$.