# Hash Function

## "Inconvenient" Keys

Earlier, we discussed one possible implementation of a dictionary based on an array.

The main downside of such a dictionary is that keys must be integers in the range $[0; K]$, and the amount of memory used is $O(K)$.

As you understand, in real life, keys are not always so "convenient":

- integers on the order of $10^9$ or even $10^{18}$;
- real numbers;
- strings and other sequences;
- objects of user-defined classes.

## Transition to Integer

Suppose in the problem you are solving, there are $N$ different keys.

In that case, **theoretically**, each key can be mapped to a **unique** integer in the range $[0; N - 1]$.

Essentially, this is about a **bijection** between the original keys and integers.

If such a bijection is possible, then the problem is solved using the "array-based dictionary" you have already encountered.

## Hashing

The main problem of constructing a bijection is that efficiently calculating the corresponding integer for a key is not always possible.

Often, all possible keys are not even known in advance, so the transition to an integer must depend **only on the key itself**.

Essentially, we obtain a **functional dependency** $H(K)$, where

- $K$ - the sought key;
- $H$ - the function that computes the corresponding integer.

This process is called **hashing**, and the function $H$ is the hash function.

It is important to understand that not every function can be used for hashing. Any hash function must satisfy two interrelated criteria:

- if $K1 = K2$, then $H(K1) = H(K2)$;
- if $H(K1) \ne H(K2)$, then $K1 \ne K2$.

### Hash Collisions

It may seem that this is analogous to the relationship of bijection, but it is not.

The criteria for a hash function do not prohibit the situation where $H(K1) = H(K2)$, but $K1 \ne K2$.

Such a situation is called a **collision**.

The frequency and conditions of collisions are one of the main criteria when properly choosing hash functions.

#### Is Collision an Error?

It is important to understand that a collision is not something "wrong" or some "shortcoming."

There are situations where the sought set of keys is fundamentally larger than the final integer result can accommodate.

Or the construction of a purely bijective function is so inefficient that it is easier to pre-allocate risks of collisions and resources for their handling.

Collisions are an integral part of the vast majority of used hash functions; they must be taken into account when choosing a hash function.

At the same time, collisions in most hash functions are **difficult to reproduce**, so in most problems, they are considered unlikely (and thus solving problems related to them does not require many resources).