# Applications

## Indexing

### Task

**Statement**: Support the operation `get(index)` in the stack in $O(1)$ (numbering from the top of the stack).

**Solution**: Using a dynamic array automatically adds this capability without additional modifications.

## Multipop

### Task

**Statement**: Support the operation `multipop(k)` in the stack in $O(k)$ - extract the top $k$ values from the stack.

Estimate the **amortized complexity** of this operation.

**Solution**: We will not do anything unnecessary - just call the `pop` operation $k$ times.

We will prove the **amortized complexity** using the accounting method:

- Suppose a total of $N$ values were pushed onto the stack.
- We will give each value $2$ coins: one for adding, one for removing.
- Regardless of the parameters $k$, a total of no more than $N$ coins will be spent on all `multipop`.
- Considering $N$ coins for insertion, we get an amortized complexity of no more than $\frac{N + N}{N} = O(1)$ for insertion/removal.

## Minimum in stack

### Task

**Statement**: Support the operation `min()` in the stack in $O(1)$ - the minimum value among those lying inside the stack.

**Solution**: We will store pairs in the stack:

- the actual value `value`;
- the minimum among all values lying **below** `value` (including `value` itself).

In this case, the answer to the query will be the second element of the pair lying at the top of the stack.

#### Example implementation

```cpp
template<typename T>
struct MinimumStack
{
  using info_t = std::pair<T, T>;

  std::stack<info_t> stack;
  T inf; // special value for the "empty stack" case

  T min() const
  {
    return stack.empty() ? inf : stack.top().second;
  }

  T top() const
  {
    // UB if stack empty
    return stack.top().first;
  }

  void push(const T& value)
  {
    auto old_min = min();
    auto new_min = std::min(old_min, value);
    stack.emplace(value, new_min);
  }

  void pop()
  {
    stack.pop();
  }
};
```

## Correct bracket sequence

**Definition**: A **correct** bracket sequence (CBS) is a sequence of brackets `(` and `)`, between which symbols `1` and `+` can be inserted to form a valid mathematical expression.

In general, the brackets do not have to be `(` and `)`.

### Task 1

**Statement**: Given a CBS of length $2 \cdot N$. For each opening bracket `(`, compute the position of the corresponding closing bracket `)`.

**Idea**: We will process the sequence from left to right (increasing index order).

Consider two opening brackets for which we have not yet encountered their corresponding closing brackets.

If we encounter a closing bracket - which opening bracket will it correspond to? The one we encountered later.

Accordingly, we again obtained the LIFO principle: the later we encounter an opening bracket, the earlier it will receive its corresponding closing bracket.

**Solution**: We will process the sequence from left to right (increasing index order).

If we encounter an opening bracket - we place its position on the top of the stack. We will call such brackets "waiting".

If we encounter a closing bracket - we extract the position of the last "waiting" bracket from the top of the stack, after which we record the corresponding pair in the answer.

#### Example implementation

```cpp
auto get_ans = [&](const std::string& brackets)
{
  std::stack<size_t> waiting_open;
  std::vector<size_t> answer(brackets.size(), -1);

  const char OPEN = '(', CLOSE = ')';

  for (size_t i = 0; i < brackets.size(); ++i)
  {
    char bracket = brackets[i];
    if (OPEN == bracket) waiting_open.push(i);
    else
    {
      size_t open_i = waiting_open.top();
      waiting_open.pop();

      answer[open_i] = i;
    }
  }

  return answer;
};
```

### Task 2

**Statement**: Given a string $S$ of $N$ characters. Check if it is a correct parentheses sequence (CPS).

**Idea**:

- Consider the algorithm for finding matching parentheses from Task 1.
- If we encounter a closing parenthesis with an empty stack, the sequence is not a CPS.
  - Moreover, it does not matter whether we encounter an opening parenthesis later or not.
- If the stack is not empty at the end, the sequence is not a CPS.

- It can be noted that in this case we are not interested in the stack itself, but only its size.
- An integer equal to the size of the "virtual" stack in VPS problems is called the **balance**.
  - One of the definitions of VPS states that "all prefix balances are non-negative, and the final balance is 0".

**Solution**:

```cpp
auto get_ans = [&](const std::string& brackets)
{
  const char OPEN = '(', CLOSE = ')';

  int balance = 0;

  for (size_t i = 0; i < brackets.size(); ++i)
  {
    char bracket = brackets[i];
    if (OPEN == bracket) balance++;
    else
    {
      if (balance == 0) return false;
      --balance;
    }
  }

  if (balance != 0) return false;

  return true;
};
```

## Nearest Smaller

### Task

**Statement**: Given an array $A$ of length $n$. For each element, find the position of the nearest "to the left" element that is smaller than the given one.

Formally: compute the array $L_i$:

- $L_i < i$.
- $A_{L_i} \le A_i$.
- All elements in the interval $(L_i, i)$ are strictly greater than $A_i$.

**Lemma**:

- Consider two elements $a_j \ge a_i$ $(j < i)$.
- For all elements $k > i$, the following holds:
  - Either $a_k < a_i$ - then both elements $(a_j, a_i)$ cannot be the answer.
  - Or the element $a_i$ may be the answer, but $a_j$ definitely cannot.

**Core Idea**:

- Consider two elements $a_j \le a_i$ $(j < i)$.
- For all elements $k > i$, the following holds:
  - Either $a_k \ge a_i$ - then the element $a_i$ may be the answer, but not $a_j$.
  - Or $a_k < a_i$ - then $a_i$ can no longer be the answer (based on the lemma), but $a_j$ may still be the answer.

- We see the LIFO principle - the element $a_i$ was processed later but will stop being a "candidate for the answer" earlier.

**Final Idea**

- We go "from left to right" through the elements.
- We maintain a stack of "candidates for the answer".
  - We store pairs (value, index).
  - We know that the elements in the stack are stored in **increasing** order.
- For the current element $a_i$, we pop elements from the top of the stack while they are strictly greater.
- We record the position at the top of the stack in the answer.
- We push the pair $(a_i, i)$ onto the top of the stack and move to the next element.

**Solution**:

```cpp
auto get_ans = [&](const std::vector<int>& a)
{
  size_t n = a.size();

  int no_pos = -1;
  std::vector<int> left_le(n, no_pos);

  int neg_inf = *std::min_element(a.begin(), a.end()) - 1;

  using info_t = std::pair<int, int>;
  std::stack<info_t> candidates = { {neg_inf, no_pos } };

  for (size_t i = 0; i < brackets.size(); ++i)
  {
    int cur = a[i];
    while (candidates.top().first > cur) candidates.pop();

    left_le[i] = candidates.top().second;
    candidates.emplace(cur, i);
  }

  return left_le;
};
```