# Implementation

## Linked list

A queue can be based on any linked list, while a deque explicitly requires a doubly linked list.

The linked list implements all the necessary operations by default without any modifications.

## Dynamic array

Based on a dynamic array, a queue/deque is implemented slightly more complex than a stack.

We will set up two pointers - `head` ($h$) and `tail` ($t$).

In this case, all elements will lie within the half-interval $[h; t)$:

Insertion/deletion of values at the beginning/end is implemented through shifts of the corresponding pointers:

- `push_back` increases $t$, `push_front` decreases $h$;
- `pop_back` decreases $t$, `pop_front` increases $h$.

### Indexing

It can be noted that the implementation on a dynamic array adds the ability to index the queue:

- `at(pos)` essentially accesses the $h + pos$ element of the internal array.

### Circular buffer

Suppose that at the moment the `capacity` of our array is $C$.

When trying to insert an element at the end when $T = C$, we will be forced to reallocate the array.

But if, for example, $H = T - 1$, it seems a bit wasteful to reallocate the array when almost all memory is unused.

To optimize memory usage, a **circular buffer** is used:

- when reaching the end of the array at $h$/$t$, they continue their movement at the beginning (and vice versa).
- the buffer is considered full when $t = (h - 1 + C)$ % $C$.
  - in this case, allocating a larger array is really the only way to insert a new element.

## Block implementation

It should be noted that in general, the ideas of a circular buffer and a linked list can be combined.

The basis will be a circular buffer of pointers, but each pointer will point to an array of small (often fixed) size.

This implementation has its pros and cons:

- on one hand, block data storage allows for more flexible memory allocation when inserting new elements.
- on the other hand, unlike a simple vector, the data is "scattered" in memory in small chunks, which may not work as well with the cache.

Essentially, the block implementation is somewhere in between a pure linked list and a dynamic array in various aspects.

## Two stacks

A rather exotic way to implement a **queue** (not a deque), but it finds application in some special tasks.

We will set up two stacks:

- in one (the tail) we will insert elements - the queue operation `push`;
- from the second (the head) we will extract elements - the queue operations `pop` / `front`.

### How does it work?

How to insert an element into the tail stack is clear. But how do elements from the tail stack get into the head?

We won't invent any tricks: if at the time of the request the head stack is empty, we will honestly transfer all elements from the tail stack to it in a loop.

Note that in this case, the element that was inserted **first** into the tail stack will end up on top of the head stack (which gives us the desired FIFO).

### Why does it work efficiently?

Let's apply a bookkeeping method to estimate complexity.

We will give each inserted value $4$ coins:
  - for insertion into the tail stack;
  - for extraction from the tail stack;
  - for insertion into the head stack;
  - for extraction from the head stack.

Thus, for $Q$ operations of insertion/extraction, we will spend no more than $4 \cdot Q = O(Q)$ coins, which gives an **amortized estimate** of $O(1)$ for one operation.

### Example implementation

```cpp
template<typename T>
struct QueueTwoStacks
{
  std::stack<T> head, tail;

  void ensure_head()
  {
    // important condition!
    if (head.empty())
    {
      while (!tail.empty())
      {
        head.push(tail.top());
        tail.pop();
      }
    }
  }

  T front() const
  {
    ensure_head();

    // UB if queue empty
    return head.top();
  }

  void push(const T& value)
  {
    tail.push(value);
  }

  void pop()
  {
    ensure_head();

    // UB if queue empty
    head.pop();
  }
};
```