# Singly Linked List

Imagine a situation: you arrive at a clinic to see a doctor, and the reception is on a first-come, first-served basis.

What will you do?

- ask "Who is last?";
- remember those who answered;
- keep an eye on them, as they are your **only link** to the queue;
  - perhaps more people will come after you - and then you will become the same link for someone else.

At this moment, you become a **node** in a structure called a "**singly linked list**".

## Nodes and Links

A singly linked list can be represented as a set of **nodes**, each of which has two attributes:

- `value` - the value (information) stored in the node;
- `next` - a pointer to the next node in the list (or `nullptr` if there is no next).

The simplest node can be described by the following structure:

```cpp
template<class T>
struct Node
{
  T value;
  Node<T>* next;
};
```

The list itself is then represented by a pointer to the first node.

```cpp
template<class T>
class SinglyLinkedList
{
public:
  using node_t = Node<T>*;
private:
  node_t first_node;
};
```

## Operations and Iterators

Any structure can be described through the operations performed on it and additional guarantees.

Let's describe the simplest types of operations that can be performed with a singly linked list.

As with a dynamic array, most operations will be performed through **iterators**.

### Iterators `begin` / `end`

In the simplest case, nodes can themselves act as iterators, as they adhere to two basic principles:

- obtaining the associated value;
- transitioning to the next iterator.

In this lecture, we will adhere to this policy (node == iterator) for simplicity of explanation.

```cpp
class SinglyLinkedList
{
public:
  using iterator_t = node_t;
  iterator_t begin();
  iterator_t end();
};
```

#### But isn't `end` "after the list"?

One way to implement the `end` paradigm is to introduce a pointer to a dummy `end` node.

However, in most situations, there is no point in making this node anything other than `nullptr`.

```cpp
class SinglyLinkedList
{
public:
  SinglyLinkedList();
private:
  node_t _begin;
  node_t _end;
};

SinglyLinkedList::iterator_t SinglyLinkedList::begin()
{
  return _begin;
}

SinglyLinkedList::iterator_t SinglyLinkedList::end()
{
  return _end;
}
```

In this case, the constructor of the list may look like this:

```cpp
SinglyLinkedList::SinglyLinkedList()
{
  _end = nullptr; // you can create some fictive Node { default(T), nullptr } if you want
  _begin = _end; // because right now we don't have any nodes in the list
};
```

#### Direct Iteration

The only noticeable difference can be considered the replacement of the `++` operator with an explicit transition through the `next` pointer:

```cpp
for (auto it = begin(); it != end(); it = it->next)
{
  // do some stuff with it->value
}
```

#### Separation of Nodes and Iterators

It is clear that using nodes directly as iterators is convenient only for the simplest tasks.

In other cases, a separate iterator structure is added, which stores a pointer to the current node.

```cpp
struct Iterator
{
  node_t current_node;

  T& operator*() { return current_node->value; }
  Iterator& operator++() { current_node = current_node->next; return *this; }
};
```

## Calculating the Number of Elements `size`

In the simplest case, calculating `size` occurs in $O(N)$ by iterating from `begin` to `end`.

An obvious optimization is to store an additional attribute `size` in the list class.

```cpp
class SinglyLinkedList
{
public:
  size_t size() const { return _size; }
private:
  size_t _size;
};
```

## Finding an Iterator with a Given Value

In the simplest case, only linear search is possible in $O(N)$ (as with an array/dynamic array).

### All Values in the List are Unique

In this case, a **dictionary** can be built:

- **key** - the information (value) stored in the node;
- **value** - the corresponding node.

This approach allows searching for a node in $O(get)$, where $get$ is the cost of the search operation in the dictionary.

## Finding an Iterator by Index

Unlike an array, the iterators of a linked list are not "Random access", which means indexing is only possible in $O(index)$.

```cpp
SinglyLinkedList::iterator_t SinglyLinkedList::at(size_t need_pos)
{
  // any need_pos validation

  auto it = begin();
  for (size_t pos = 0; pos < need_pos; pos++, it = it->next);

  return it;
};
```

## Placing a Node Before and After an Iterator

### Placing AFTER an Iterator

Let's say we have a node `before`, **after** which we need to place a new node `node`.

In this case, $O(1)$ actions are required:

- create the link "next -> after";
- create the link "before -> next".

```cpp
class SinglyLinkedList
{
private:
  void _place_after(node_t before, node_t node)
  {
    auto after = before->next;
    node->next = after;
    before->next = node;
  }
};
```

### Placing BEFORE an Iterator

The only way in the context of a singly linked list is to perform a linear search for the **previous** node, relative to which the insertion "after" will be performed - resulting in $O(index)$ actions for insertion.

## Placing a Node at the Very Beginning

Placing a node at the beginning (before `begin`) is a special case:

- there is no node "before";
- it is necessary to update the value of the `begin` field.

```cpp
class SinglyLinkedList
{
private:
  void _place_first(node_t node)
  {
    node->next = _begin;
    _begin = node;
  }
};
```

### Head Node `head`

Instead of implementing a separate method for placing a node at the beginning, one can simply make a node "before `begin`" - it is usually called `head`.

The pointer to `head` cannot be `nullptr`, unlike the pointer to `end` - but the value stored in `head` is not used anywhere.

```cpp
class SinglyLinkedList
{
public:
  SinglyLinkedList();
private:
  node_t _head;
};

SinglyLinkedList::iterator_t SinglyLinkedList::begin()
{
  return _head->next;
}

SinglyLinkedList::SinglyLinkedList()
{
  _head = new Node { default(T), _end };
};
```

Note that with this implementation, the need for `place_first` disappears:

- there is also an iterator "before" for `begin`;
- instead of a separate `_begin` field, we change the `next` attribute in the `head` node, which is handled by the general case.

In the future, we will assume that the list is written using the `head` paradigm.

## Placing a Node at the End of the List

It is important to understand that "placing at the end of the list" means "placing **before** `end`".

Therefore, in the implementation described above, this process will be performed in $O(size)$.

To avoid unnecessary actions, one can store an additional field in the list `last`, pointing to the node "before `end`".

It is clear that in an empty list, `last` corresponds to `head`.

```cpp
class SinglyLinkedList
{
private:
  node_t _last;

  void _place_last(node_t node)
  {
    _place_after(_last, node);
    _last = node;
  }
};

SinglyLinkedList::SinglyLinkedList()
{
  _last = _head;
};
```

## Inserting a Value to the List

This process consists of three steps:

- create a new node with the inserted value.
- find the node/iterator after which the value is inserted.
- perform the insertion of the node (see the previous point).

It is clear that the only potentially expensive operation is **finding the iterator**, as the other operations are performed in $O(1)$.

```cpp
void SinglyLinkedList::insert_after(SinglyLinkedList::iterator_t before, const T& value)
{
  node_t node = new Node { value, nullptr };
  _place_after(before, node);

  _size++;
}
```

### At the Beginning / End of the List

In this case, insertion occurs after the `head` and `last` nodes.

Since the list explicitly stores pointers to these nodes, the search is performed in $O(1)$.

### At a Given Position in the List

In this case, the search for the node/iterator is performed in $O(index)$ through a linear pass starting from `begin`.

## Extracting a Node Before/After an Iterator

### Extracting a Node After an Iterator

Let's say we have a node `before`, **after** which we need to extract a node.

In this case, only one action is required - to create the link "before -> after".

```cpp
class SinglyLinkedList
{
private:
  node_t _extract_after(node_t before)
  {
    auto node = before->next;
    auto after = node->next;
    before->next = after;
    return node;
  }
};
```

### Extracting a Node Before an Iterator

Similarly to "inserting before an iterator", the only way for a singly linked list is to find the iterator "before" in $O(index)$, after which the above actions are performed.

## Extracting a Node from the Beginning / End of the List

### Extracting from the Beginning

This operation poses no difficulties and is performed in $O(1)$, regardless of whether `head` is used or not.

### Extracting from the End

On the other hand, to remove from the end, you will have to find the node "before `last`", which can only be done in $O(size)$.

And don't forget to update the `_last` field of the list (if you are using it).

## Erasing a Value from the List

Unlike a dynamic array, to erase a value from a singly linked list, we need an iterator "before" our value (for the reasons described above).

The general logic of the process is similar to insertion:

- find the iterator "before" the value;
- extract the node corresponding to the value;
- **delete** the node using the `delete` operator.

```cpp
void SinglyLinkedList::erase_after(SinglyLinkedList::iterator_t before)
{
  auto node = _extract_after(before);
  delete node;

  _size--;
}
```

Similarly to addition, the complexity of the operation entirely depends on the complexity of finding the corresponding iterator:

- from the beginning - $O(1)$;
- from the end - $O(size)$;
- from a given position - $O(index)$.