# Doubly Linked List

It is surprising how many inconveniences arise from the inability to walk "backward" in a linked list.

But this problem can be easily solved! Let's add a pointer to the "previous" node in each node (along with the "next"):

```cpp
template<class T>
struct Node
{
  T value;
  Node<T>* next;
  Node<T>* prev; // new field
};
```

It seems like a small addition, but it greatly simplifies the execution of some operations on the list.

## Changes in Basic Operations

Here, only the operations that have undergone significant changes compared to the singly linked list will be listed.

### Inserting a Node Before an Iterator

This insertion can be performed in $O(1)$ actions, as the need for a linear search for the iterator "before" is eliminated.

At the same time, it should be remembered that the overall procedure for inserting a node is supplemented by setting "reverse" links.

```cpp
class DoublyLinkedList
{
private:
  void _place_after(node_t before, node_t node)
  {
    auto after = before->next;

    before->next = node;
    node->prev = before;

    after->prev = node;
    node->next = after;
  }

  void _place_before(node_t after, node_t node)
  {
    _place_after(after->prev, node);
  }
};
```

### Extracting a Node Before an Iterator

Similarly to insertion, this operation can also be performed in $O(1)$ actions, as the need for a linear search for the iterator "before" is eliminated.

At the same time, it should be remembered that the overall procedure for extracting a node has also been supplemented by setting "reverse" links.

```cpp
class DoublyLinkedList
{
private:
  void _extract(node_t node)
  {
    auto before = node->prev;
    auto after = node->next;

    before->next = after;
    after->prev = before;
  }

  node_t _extract_after(node_t before)
  {
    auto node = before->next;
    _extract(node);
    return node;
  }

  node_t _extract_before(node_t after)
  {
    auto node = after->prev;
    _extract(node);
    return node;
  }
};
```

## Changes Regarding `end` and `head`

You may have noticed that in a doubly linked list, for inserting/extracting a node, it is important to have correct nodes both "before" and "after".

Thus, `end` needs to be made a dummy node alongside `head` (instead of `nullptr` in the singly linked list).

At the same time, it is possible to get rid of the `last` variable, for which additional code was needed to support.

## Circular List

It is easy to notice that now `head` and `end` essentially represent the same dummy nodes - with the only difference being that one has `nullptr` before it, while the other has it after.

To completely eliminate `nullptr`, we can loop the list, merging `end` and `head`.

### Initialization and Empty List

An empty list now contains only a pointer to `head`, which is looped back to itself from both sides.

```cpp
class DoublyCircularLinkedList
{
private:
  node_t _head;
};

DoublyCircularLinkedList::DoublyCircularLinkedList()
{
  _head = new Node { default(T), nullptr, nullptr};
  _head->next = _head;
  _head->prev = _head; // and nullptr is gone
};
```

### Iteration

For iterators, nothing has changed - we start from `head->next` and end at `head` (which has merged with `end`).

```cpp
DoublyCircularLinkedList::iterator_t DoublyCircularLinkedList::begin()
{
  return _head->next;
}

DoublyCircularLinkedList::iterator_t DoublyCircularLinkedList::end()
{
  return _head;
}
```