# Questions

- What are the advantages and disadvantages of a doubly linked list compared to a singly linked list?
- Which operations does a linked list (singly/doubly linked) perform more/less efficiently compared to a dynamic array?

# Advanced questions

- Imagine you need only operations `pop_back` and `pop_back`. What is better to use in the most cases - dynamic array or linked list? Why?

- For linked lists, the use of an allocator based on a **static array** is often considered. Such an allocator, among other things, allows the use of **array indices** instead of pointers.
  - How you will implement it? You can assume there won't be more than $N$ nodes used.
    - Can you use **dynamic array** instead if you don't know maximal amount of nodes?
    - Can you somehow reuse already "erased" nodes?
  - What are the advantages and disadvantages of using such an allocator compared to an allocator based on **dynamic memory**?
  - Suggest a way to optimize the memory occupied by a node in a doubly linked list when using array indices instead of pointers.
    - Instead of `next` and `prev`, use a single field `size_t link`.
    - In addition to `head`, store $O(1)$ information to obtain `begin`.

- How you can implement **linked-based dictionary**? What are disavantages and advantages of it comparing to array-based one?

- Think about implementing the following operations on the **structure** of a singly/doubly linked list:
  - concatenation of two lists.
  - deletion of an entire subsegment of the list.
  - reversing the list (analogous to `std::reverse`).
  - " $k$-compression of the list" - keep only nodes with numbers $k, 2 \cdot k, \dots $.

- Consider how to implement a matrix (two-dimensional array) based on singly/doubly linked lists.
  - Which implementation details easily generalize from the one-dimensional case, and which differ significantly?
  - For which operations will such an implementation be more efficient compared to an implementation based on arrays?

- You are given the first node of a singly linked list. You know two facts:
  1. there are no more than $N$ nodes in the list;
  2. each node **guaranteed** has a next one.

  Exercises:
  - Prove that this list represents a chain that ends in a cycle.
  - Suggest an algorithm to find the cycle in $O(N^2)$ time and $O(1)$ additional memory.
  - Optimize the cycle-finding algorithm to $O(N)$ time.
    - Use two iterators - one moves to `next` (speed $1$), the other to `next -> next` (speed $2$).
    - You may need two "phases" of the algorithm.