# Trees

## Foreword

In this lecture, we will discuss certain types of trees.

In general, trees are a special case of graphs and are studied accordingly within the framework of graph theory. At the same time, one can get acquainted with tree-like data structures without understanding all the nuances and details.

Accordingly, I will try to provide only the most necessary definitions and terms related to trees in this lecture.

For those who wish to learn more about the basics of graph theory, a link to a course within Codeforces EDU has been added.

## What is a tree?

What is a linked list? A set of nodes connected in a certain way.

The same can be said about trees - they are also nodes, also connections with certain conditions.

Since a tree is a special case of a graph, the nodes of a tree are also called **vertices**, and the connections are called **edges**.

Let's build a tree from nodes:

- Unlike most trees in the real world, trees in Computer Science usually "grow" from top to bottom.

- Accordingly, we will first fix the so-called **root** node $R$ - this is where we will start any actions with our tree (compare with the "head" node in a linked list).

- We will attach several (possibly zero) nodes to the root node.

- To some of the attached nodes (possibly none), we will attach more nodes.

- And so on.

## Basic Terms

### Root Tree

In fact, we have built a "rooted (suspended)" tree.

In general, a tree does not have to have a root, but within this course, we will work only with rooted trees, so in the future, when we say "tree," we will mean "rooted tree" unless explicitly stated otherwise.

### Size of the Tree

Most often, the **size of the tree** $S$ refers to the number of vertices $N$ in it.

Note that even a single vertex is a valid tree of size $1$.

There is also the concept of an empty tree (size $0$), but this is usually relevant within a certain context.

Note that in a tree of size $N$, the **number of edges** is $(N - 1)$.

### Paths in the Tree

A **path** of length $k$ is defined as a sequence of nodes $v_1$, $v_2$, $\dots$, $v_k$ such that there are edges between $v_1$ and $v_2$, between $v_2$ and $v_3$, and so on.

A **simple** path is a path where all vertices are unique. In the future, we will assume that all paths in this lecture are simple.

A path from vertex $v$ **to the root** is called a path where $v_1 = v$ and $v_k = R$.

### Kinship Relations

In a tree, four designations are most often used to describe relationships between nodes:

- Node $p$ is the **parent** of node $v$ if node $p$ is the second node ($v_2$) in the path from $v$ to the root.
- $v$ is a **child** of node $p$ if node $p$ is the parent of vertex $v$.

- Node $p$ is an **ancestor** of node $v$ if node $p$ lies somewhere on the path from $v$ to the root (including $v$ itself).
- Node $v$ is a **descendant** of node $p$ if node $p$ is an ancestor of vertex $v$.

### Degree of a Vertex

The **degree** of vertex $v$, denoted as $deg_v$, is the number of **children** of vertex $v$.

A node with a degree of $0$ is called a **leaf** (more common name) or **terminal**.

It is important to note that regardless of the tree structure, the sum of the degrees of the vertices equals $(N - 1)$ - corresponding to the number of edges in the tree.

### Subtree of a Vertex

The **subtree** of vertex $v$ is defined as the subset of all its **descendants** with the connections between them.

By definition, the root of the subtree of vertex $v$ is the vertex $v$ itself.

It can also be said that the subtree of vertex $v$ consists of:

- the vertex $v$ itself;
- the subtrees of its children $c_1$, $c_2$, $\dots$;
- edges from $v$ to its children.

### Height and Depth of a Vertex

The **depth** of vertex $v$ is the length of the path from the root to $v$.

Essentially, the depth of a vertex equals the number of its ancestors.

The **height** of vertex $v$ is the length of the path from $v$ to its descendant with the greatest _depth_.

The **height** of the entire tree $H$ is equal to the greatest height among all vertices, that is, the height of the root $R$.

## Representation and Storage of Trees

Like in a linked list, the nodes of a tree are most often represented as instances of special classes that store the value `value` and connections to other nodes.

Connections are usually represented in one of two ways:

- nodes are stored in dynamic memory, connections are the built-in pointer/reference mechanism of the language;
- nodes are stored in an array, connections are the positions (identifiers) of the nodes within that array.

The tree structure usually stores one important attribute - the pointer/identifier of the root node $R$.

### Representation "node - parent"

A rooted tree can be defined by a set of associations "node - parent node" (a total of $N - 1$ associations).

It is obvious that for node $R$, there is no such association (since it has no parent).

This form of representation is often intermediate and is used for transmitting the tree over an information channel.

## Traversing the Tree

### Descending the Tree

**Descending** usually refers to moving from the root to a specific vertex along the "parent - child" edges.

Descending can be implemented both recursively and non-recursively.

In the case of a recursive implementation, actions can be performed on the way back - so-called **return actions**.

#### Asymptotics of Descending

Regardless of the type of descent, the asymptotics will be $O(H)$, as in the worst case, the descent will occur to the deepest node of the tree.

### Full Traversal of the Tree

Processes **all** vertices and edges of the tree in a certain order. It is important that each vertex/edge is processed $O(1)$ times.

It is usually described recursively (but a non-recursive implementation is possible).

#### Asymptotics of Traversal

Regardless of the type of traversal, the asymptotics will be $O(N)$:

- in the tree, there are a total of $(N - 1)$ edges, each edge is processed $O(1)$ times and traversed twice - from parent to child and from child to parent.
- in the tree, there are a total of $N$ vertices, each processed $O(1)$ times and visited exactly once during descent and $deg_v$ times during ascent.

In total, this results in $(N - 1) \cdot (O(1) + 2) + N \cdot O(1) + \sum{(1 + deg_v)} = O(N)$ visits/transitions/processings.