# Binary Trees

A tree whose vertex degree does not exceed $2$ is called a **binary** tree.

In a binary tree, the children of a vertex are called the **left** and **right** child, respectively.

## Balance of Binary Trees

If a binary tree has $N$ vertices, then the height of the tree can vary from $N$ (called "bamboo") to $\lceil{\log_2{N}}\rceil$.

A tree with a height of $O(\log{N})$ is called **balanced**.

### Complete Binary Tree

One example of a balanced binary tree is a **complete** tree - all vertices have a degree of either $2$ or $0$.

Let's show this:

- Let the height of the tree be $H$.
- At depth $i$, such a tree will contain exactly $2^{(i - 1)}$ vertices.
- The total number of vertices in the tree will be $N = 2^0 + 2^1 + \dots + 2^{(H - 1)} = 2^H - 1$.
- From this, we get $H = \log_2{(N + 1)} = \lceil{\log_2{N}}\rceil = O(\log{N})$.

### Other Types of Balance

In real life, not all binary trees are complete.

At the same time, there are more "general" ways to make a tree balanced.

For example, for each vertex $v$, certain conditions may be met:

- the difference in **sizes** of the left and right subtrees does not exceed $1$: $|S_L - S_R| \le 1$;
- the difference in **heights** of the left and right subtrees does not exceed $1$: $|H_L - H_R| \le 1$.

It is clear that there are other ways to balance trees, but the two mentioned above are the simplest.

Note that a complete tree is balanced according to both criteria.

## Representation and Storage of Binary Trees

### Pointers to Dynamic Memory

In the case of using pointers to dynamic memory, the nodes of a binary tree are very similar to the nodes of a linked list (only instead of pointers to `prev` / `next`, pointers to `left` / `right` / `parent` (optionally) are stored).

### Identifiers (Positions in an Array)

For the case of using identifiers (positions in an array), there is an interesting form of numbering the vertices of a binary tree:

- the root vertex has identifier $1$;
- the children of vertex $v$ have numbers $2 \cdot v$ and $2 \cdot v + 1$.
- with such numbering, the parent of vertex $v$ has number $\lfloor\frac{v}{2}\rfloor$

This form of numbering simplifies the processing of the corresponding connections - it is enough to know the identifier of the vertex itself to find all its neighbors.

At the same time, there are also negative aspects to this approach. In general, the identifier can have a value up to $O(2^H)$.

- In the case of a balanced tree, this limitation turns into $O(N)$ - almost all cells are filled;
- in the case of strong imbalance of the tree, many cells of the array remain empty, and memory is used inefficiently.

## Traversing a Binary Tree

#### Examples of Descents

##### The Leftmost Vertex

Non-recursive implementation:

```cpp
Node* go(Node* start = root) {
  Node* node = start;
  while (node->left != nullptr) {
    node = node->left;
  }

  return node;
}
```

Recursive implementation:

```cpp
Node* go(Node* node = root) {
  if (node->left == nullptr) return node;
  return go(node->left);
}
```

##### Alternating Descent

First go right, then left, then again right, etc.

Non-recursive implementation:

```cpp
Node* go(Node* start = root, bool to_right = true) {
  Node* node = start;
  while (true) {
    if (to_right) {
      if (node->right == nullptr) return node;
      node = node->right;
    } else {
      if (node->left == nullptr) return node;
      node = node->left;
    }

    to_right = !to_right;
  }
}
```

Recursive implementation:

```cpp
Node* go(Node* node = root, bool to_right = true) {
  if (to_right) {
    if (node->right == nullptr) return node;
    return go(node->right, false);
  } else {
    if (node->left == nullptr) return node;
    return go(node->left, true);
  }
}
```

### Full Traversal of the Tree

#### Direction and Order of Traversal

There are three types of traversals based on the order of processing the vertex and its subtrees:

- LVR - first the left subtree, then the vertex, then the right;
- LRV - first the left, then the right, then the vertex;
- VLR - first the vertex, then the left, then the right.

Similarly, there are "mirror" analogues, where you first go right and then left.

#### Recursive Examples of Implementation

##### Output of Vertices in LVR Order

```cpp
void print_tree(Node* node) {
  if (node == nullptr) return;

  print_tree(node->left);

  std::cout << node->value << std::endl;

  print_tree(node->right);
}
```

##### Output of the Depth of Each Vertex in VLR Order

```cpp
void print_depth(Node* node, int depth = 1) {
  if (node == nullptr) return;

  std::cout << node->value << " " << depth << std::endl;

  print_depth(node->left, depth + 1);
  print_depth(node->right, depth + 1);
}
```

##### Calculating the Height of the Tree in LRV Order

```cpp
int calc_height(Node* node) {
  if (node == nullptr) return 0;

  int left_height = calc_height(node->left);
  int right_height = calc_height(node->right);

  return std::max(left_height, right_height) + 1;
}
```

#### Non-recursive Variant of Full Traversal

For each node, a non-recursive algorithm can be implemented to transition to the "next" node in the traversal (analogous to `next` in a linked list). However, unlike a linked list, in a binary tree, `next` is a function (rule of transition), not a reference to a specific node.

In this case, the traversal becomes analogous to iterating over a sequence:

```cpp
for (Node* node = first(); node != nullptr; node = next(node)) {
  // process node
}
```

Here, `first` denotes the first (starting) node in the traversal.

Note that similarly to `next`, a `prev` function can always be constructed, and similarly to `first`, a `last` function can be created.

##### Implementation of `next`

The implementation heavily depends on the chosen order and direction of traversal.

As an example, let's describe `next` for the LVR order of traversal:

- the node must store a pointer to the parent node (`parent`);
- if the vertex has a right child - we go to it;
  - then iteratively go to the left child as long as it exists.
  - thus, you will find the "leftmost node in the right subtree" - this is the result, we return it.
- if the vertex has no right child, we iteratively ascend to the parents.
  - if we ascended from the left child, then the current node is the result, we return it.
  - if we ascended above the root, then the starting node was the last in the traversal, and the traversal is complete.

Example implementation:

```cpp
Node* next_lvr(Node* node) {
  if (node->right != nullptr) {
    Node* next = node->right;
    while (next->left != nullptr) next = next->left;

    return next;
  } else {
    while (node->parent != nullptr) {
      Node* parent = node->parent;
      if (node == parent->left) return parent;
    }

    return nullptr;
  }
}
```