# Search Trees

A tree is merely a way to represent data and their relationships.

One application of trees is to store data while implementing the following operations:

- adding a value;
- deleting a value;
- searching for a node with a given value;
- iterating over all stored values.

Trees that efficiently perform such operations are called **search trees**.

## Relation to Set and Dictionary

It can be easily noticed that the main operations of a search tree coincide with the operations of the abstractions of a dictionary and a set (with the additional condition of uniqueness of stored values):

- in the case of a set, the nodes store the corresponding elements of the set;
- in the case of a dictionary, the nodes store pairs (key, value), but the search is performed by key.

Note that in this case, there is a requirement for comparability on the data type of the elements of the set / keys of the dictionary (recall the lecture on sorting and comparators).

## What Types of Search Trees Are There?

Most often, search trees are binary and balanced.

In general, a tree does not have to be binary (for example, in a "2-3 tree," each node has either $2$ or $3$ children).

Balance is also not formally mandatory, but in the overwhelming majority of cases, it is the balanced trees that have the best asymptotics for the operations mentioned above.

## Binary Search Trees (BST)

In a binary search tree, for any vertex $v$, the following rule holds:

- let the value $k$ be stored in vertex $v$;
- for all vertices $vl$ in the left subtree of vertex $v$, it holds that their value $kl \le k$;
- for all vertices $vr$ in the right subtree of vertex $v$, it holds that their value $kr \ge k$.

### Basic Operations on BST

#### The Deepest Node During Descent

**Auxiliary** operation (usually has `private` access level or similar).

Let us be given a value $x$. It is necessary to find the deepest node whose path coincides with the path to the node with value $x$.

For this, we will introduce a parameter `last` - the last node processed before the current node.

- if the current node is absent - the search is complete, we return `last`.
- we update `last` to the current node.
- if the value $k$ in the current node is greater than $x$ - we continue the search in the left subtree;
- if the value $k$ in the current node is less than $x$ - we continue the search in the right subtree.

Example of non-recursive implementation:

```cpp
Node* _get_last(Node* start, const T& value) {
  Node* last = nullptr;
  for (Node* node = start; node != nullptr; ) {
    last = node;

    if (value < node->value) node = node->left;
    else node = node->right;
  }

  return last;
}
```

#### Searching for a Value

We find the deepest node through descent. If the found node contains the sought value - we return the node as the result.

Example of non-recursive implementation:

```cpp
Node* _find(Node* start, const T& value) {
  Node* last = _get_last(start, value);

  if (last != nullptr && last->value == value) return last;

  return nullptr;
}

Node* find(const T& value) {
  return _find(root, value);
}
```

In the recursive implementation, descent is combined with search:

```cpp
Node* _find(Node* node, const T& value) {
  if (node == nullptr) return node;

  if (value == node->value) return node;

  if (value < node->value) return _find(node->left, value);
  else return _find(node->right, value);
}
```

#### Inserting a Value

We find the deepest node through descent. We will add a new node to the left or right depending on the value being inserted.

Also, do not forget to update the root if the tree was previously empty.

Example of non-recursive implementation:

```cpp
Node* _insert(Node* start, Node* new_node) {
  Node* last = _get_last(start, new_node->value);

  if (last != nullptr) {
    if (new_node->value < last->value) last->left = new_node;
    else last->right = new_node;

    new_node->parent = last;
  } else {
    start = new_node; // tree was empty
  }

  return start;
}

Node* insert(const T& value) {
  Node* new_node = create_node(value);

  root = _insert(root, new_node);
}
```

In the recursive implementation, all connections are updated on the way back:

```cpp
Node* _insert(Node* node, Node* new_node) {
  if (node == nullptr) return new_node;

  if (new_node->value < node->value) {
    node->left = _insert(node->left, new_node);
  } else {
    node->right = _insert(node->right, new_node);
  }

  return node;
}
```

#### Traversing BST

BST is usually traversed in LVR order - in this case, the values are traversed in **non-decreasing** order.

In this case, `first` and `last` denote the leftmost and rightmost nodes of the tree, respectively (obtained through descent).

Example implementation of the `next` function for LVR traversal has already been described in the section on [non-recursive traversals of binary trees](#non-recursive-variant-of-full-traversal).

#### Finding the Nearest Greater Value

We find the deepest node through descent.

- If the sought value is greater than or equal to the value in the found node - we will go to the next one using the `next` operation.

Note that in general, this search has $4$ variations:

- nearest greater / lesser value;
- strict / non-strict inequality.

Example of non-recursive implementation:

```cpp
Node* _find_greater(Node* start, const T& value) {
  Node* last = _get_last(start, value);

  if (last->value <= value) {
    last = next(last);
  }

  return last;
}

Node* find_greater(const T& value) {
  return _find_greater(root, value);
}
```

#### Deleting a Value

It is necessary to delete node $v$ with the given value.

- Using descent, we will find the sought node.
- If node $v$ has fewer than two children, we simply replace it with its existing child.

- Otherwise, we will find node $x$, which follows $v$ in the order of traversal.
  - Since in this situation node $v$ has a right child, node $x$ is actually "the leftmost in the right subtree of $v$".
- We will transfer the data from $x$ to $v$, after which we will **recursively** call the deletion of $x$ from the right subtree of node $v$.

Example of recursive implementation:

```cpp
Node* _erase(Node* node, const T& value) {
  if (value < node->value) {
    node->left = _erase(node->left, value);
    return node;
  }

  if (value > node->value) {
    node->right = _erase(node->right, value);
    return node;
  }

  // value == node->value

  if (node->left == nullptr) {
    Node* right_child = node->right;

    delete node;
    return right_child;
  }

  if (node->right == nullptr) {
    Node* left_child = node->left;

    delete node;
    return left_child;
  }

  // both children

  Node* next_node = next(node);
  node->value = next_node->value;

  node->right = _erase(node->right, next_node);

  return node;
}
```

### Balanced BST

It is easy to notice that all operations on BST (except full traversal) are performed in $O(H)$ (since they are based on the descent operation).

For operations to be efficient, the height of the tree should be as small as possible.

Therefore, it is most common to use balanced BSTs with height $H = O(\log{N})$.

#### Static Balanced BST

Given an array of values $a_i$ of length $N$.

It is necessary to build a balanced BST from the given array and respond only to search operations.

- We will sort the array $a_i$ in $O(N \log{N})$.
- We will find the position of the median of the array $M = \frac{N}{2}$ and place the value $a_M$ at the root of the tree.
- **Recursively** build the left and right subtrees based on $a_1 \dots a_{M - 1}$ and $a_{M + 1} \dots a_N$, respectively.

The resulting tree will be balanced in terms of the sizes of the subtrees.

#### Self-balancing BST

Most often, the task still implies insertion and deletion operations.

In such cases, balance can easily be disrupted - as a result, the height of the tree can degenerate from $O(\log{N})$ to $O(N)$.

For such situations, self-balancing search trees are used.

These trees use special operations to maintain their balance invariants - therefore, their height is always guaranteed to be $O(\log{N})$ (except for specific cases).

A large number of self-balancing trees have been described: AVL tree, 2-3 tree (not quite binary), red-black tree, and many others.

##### "Almost Balanced" BST Without Insertions

Given an array of values $a_i$ of length $N_0$.

It is necessary to build a balanced BST from the given array and respond only to search and **deletion** operations.

- This task can, of course, be efficiently solved by any self-balancing search tree with operations in $O(\log{N})$, where $N$ is the current size of the tree.

- At the same time, it can be noted that the deletion operation can only **reduce** the current height of the tree. Thus, a statically balanced BST can be built (see above), after which deletion operations can be performed without additional modifications to the tree.

  With this implementation, the asymptotics of operations will be $O(\log{N_0})$ - not quite balanced, but often sufficiently efficient.