# C++

Similarly to implementations based on hash tables, C++ has implementations of dictionaries/sets based on search trees (most often **red-black**):

- `std::map` and `std::multimap` for dictionary/multidictionary.
- `std::set` and `std::multiset` for set/multiset.

Similarly, comparisons of keys/elements are performed using the template parameter `Compare = std::less<T>`.

## Standard Operations of Dictionary/Set

All operations are absolutely analogous to classes based on hash tables.

- `begin` and `rbegin` - iterators to the first (minimum) and last (maximum) nodes;
  - the iterator behaves like a pointer to:
    - set - the element itself.
    - dictionary - `std::pair<key, value>`.
- `find` - find an iterator by the given key/element.
- `insert` - adding a value;
- `erase` - deleting a value;
  - it is recommended to delete via iterator.
- operator `[]` (only in dictionary):
  - returns the value for the given key.
  - if such a key does not exist, it **creates** an entry with the given key and a **default** value.
- `count` - the number of keys/elements with the given value.
  - in multi-structures, it iterates over all "equal" elements in $O(cnt)$.

## Constructing from sequence

In general constructor from sequence will be executed with $O(n \log{n})$ complexity, where $n$ is the length of the sequence.

But in case sequence is already sorted (relative to `Compare`), constructor will be executed in $O(n)$.

## Special Operations of Search Trees

- `lower_bound` - iterator to the nearest greater or equal value.
- `upper_bound` - iterator to the nearest strictly greater value.
- for finding the nearest lesser values, the following templates can be used:

```cpp
// find strict less x
auto it = ds.lower_bound(x); // for less or equal replace "lower_bound" by "upper_bound"
if (it != ds.begin()) {
  it = std::prev(it); // it--
  // process it
} else {
  // no strict less
}
```

# Java

Similarly to implementations based on hash tables, Java has implementations of dictionaries/sets based on search trees (most often **red-black**):

- `TreeMap` for dictionary.
- `TreeSet` for set.

Similarly, comparisons of keys/elements are performed using a type parameter `Comparator` or by implementing the `Comparable` interface.

## Standard Operations of Dictionary/Set

All operations are absolutely analogous to classes based on hash tables.

- `entrySet` (only in dictionary) - iterable pseudo-set of pairs (key, value).
  - `keySet` and `values` - derived pseudo-structures - wrappers.
- `contains` / `containsKey` - check for the presence of an element/key in the structure.
- `add` / `put` - add an element/association.
- `remove` - deleting the node corresponding to the value.
- `get` (only in dictionary) - associated value with the given key (or `null`).

## Special Operations of Search Trees

Provided by the `SortedSet` / `NavigableSet` and `SortedMap` / `NavigableMap` interfaces, respectively.

For dictionaries, the function names are suffixed with `Key` and `Entry`, respectively.

- `first` / `last` - first (minimum) / last (maximum) values.
  - `pollFirst` / `pollLast` - respectively, deletion (and retrieval) of the corresponding values.
- `lower` / `floor` / `ceiling` / `higher` - searching for strictly lesser / lesser or equal / greater or equal / strictly greater values.

# Python

There is no implementation of tree-based structures in Python's standard library.

At the same time, there are many user libraries available online that fill this "gap".

One example is the `sortedcontainers` library, which is also used on the "LeetCode" website (a site with interview problems).