# Sequences in C++

## Basic Operations

Any data structure in C++ that is a sequence implements the following two operations:

- `iterator begin()` - an iterator to the first element of the sequence;
- `iterator end()` - an iterator pointing to a dummy element "past the last".

Thus, the entire sequence can be described as a **half-interval** _[begin; end)_.

Often, variations of these operations may also be defined:

- `cbegin()` and `cend()` return the `const` version of the iterators (elements cannot be modified);
- `rbegin()` and `rend()` return iterators for iterating "backward".

### Dereferencing end

Note that dereferencing the `end` iterator is UB (_undefined behavior_).

Therefore, always check that the obtained iterators are not equal to `end` before dereferencing.

### External Operations

C++ defines external function analogs:

- `begin(container)` / `cbegin(container)` - analogous to `.begin()` and `.cbegin()`, respectively;
- `end(container)` / `cend(container)` - analogous to `.end()` and `.cend()`.

### Array as a Sequence

#### Array in static memory

A variable of type `T array[]` can be represented as a sequence using the **external** operations described above.

Similarly, for the class `std::array<T, size_t N>` (a wrapper around a static array), the `begin` / `end` methods are already defined.

#### Array in dynamic memory

At the same time, a variable `T* array = new T[size]` cannot be represented as a sequence for the simple reason that C++ cannot compute `end` without an explicitly computable size of the array.

## Iteration

The simplest way to iterate over a finite sequence, as described above, in C++ will be written as follows:

```cpp
for (auto& it = seq.begin(); it != seq.end(); ++it)
{
  T& value = *it;
  // process value
}
```

It is easy to see some of the iterator operations discussed above:

- `operator*()`;
- `operator++()`;
- `friend operator!=(a, b)`.

Clearly, this is just the simplest variant of processing - many algorithms use other traversal options or additional iterator operators.

### Functions for Sequences in C++

Let's consider some useful functions described in the standard library:

- `find` / `find_if` / `find_if_not` - find an iterator to an element with a value equal to the given one / satisfying a condition.
- `min_element` / `max_element` / `minmax_element` - find an iterator to the minimum / maximum / both.
- `for_each` - apply a given action to all elements of the sequence.
- `fill` - assign the same value to all elements of the sequence.
- `accumulate` - left fold (reduce) of elements - essentially sequentially "adding" elements to the result.
- `reverse` - reverse the sequence.
- `copy` / `copy_if` / `copy_backwards` - copies elements of the sequence to a new one.
- `move` / `move_if` / `move_backwards` - similar to `copy`, but performs a `move` operation on the elements.

Note that search algorithms return iterators, not the elements themselves or their positions:

- if the element is not found / the sequence is empty, `end` is returned - do not forget to check the result.
- if the position of the element is needed (in indexed sequences) - use `std::distance` from `begin`.

### Foreach

In C++, `for-each` is implemented in the format

```cpp
for (T& value : sequence)
{
  // process value
}
```