# Applications

## Indexing

### Problem

**Condition**: Support the operation `get(index)` in the queue in $O(1)$ (numbering from the first element of the queue).

**Solution**: Using a dynamic array automatically adds this capability without additional modifications.

## Multipop

### Problem

**Condition**: Support the operation `multipop(k)` in the queue in $O(k)$ - extract the first $k$ values from the queue.

Estimate the **amortized complexity** of this operation.

**Solution**: Everything is completely analogous to a stack.

## Minimum in queue

### Problem

**Condition**: Support the operation `min()` in the queue in $O(1)$ - the minimum value among the elements in the queue.

**Solution 1**:

- Implement the queue based on two **minimum stacks**.
- Choose the smaller of the minimums from each stack.

**Idea 2**:

- Consider values $v_1 \ge v_2$ such that $v_1$ was inserted into the queue before $v_2$.
- In this case, after inserting $v_1$, it will never be a **candidate for the answer**, as it will be removed before $v_2$.
  - Such a $v_1$ can be omitted from being explicitly stored in the queue.

**Solution 2**:

- Use a deque (we will need the `pop_back` operation).
- Store pairs (`value`, `push_index`) - the value and the insertion request number.
  - Also maintain `push_cnt` and `pop_cnt` - the number of completed insertion and extraction requests respectively.
- Suppose we insert the value $v$ at the end of the queue.
  - While the value at the end of the deque is greater than $v$, we extract it using `pop_back`.
  - Add the pair ($v$, `push_cnt`) to the end and increment `push_cnt` by $1$.
- When extracting:
  - Compare the insertion request number of the front element with `pop_cnt`.
  - If the numbers match, physically extract the element.
  - In any case, increment `pop_cnt`.
- The minimum request is performed in $O(1)$ - in the described implementation, the first element is always the minimum.

#### Example implementation (for 2)

```cpp
template<typename T>
struct MinimumQueue
{
  using info_t = std::pair<T, size_t>;

  std::deque<info_t> deque;
  size_t push_cnt, pop_cnt;

  T min() const
  {
    // UB if queue is empty
    return deque.front().first;
  }

  // we can't do top() queries now

  void push(const T& value)
  {
    while (!deque.empty() && deque.back().first >= value) deque.pop_back();
    deque.emplace_back(value, push_cnt);
    ++push_cnt;
  }

  void pop()
  {
    // UB if queue is empty
    if (deque.front().second == pop_cnt) deque.pop_front();
    ++pop_cnt;
  }
};
```

## Insertion at a fixed position K

### Problem

**Condition**:

- Given $Q$ requests of three types:
  - Insert a value at the **end** of the queue;
  - Insert a value $k$-th from the beginning into the queue.
    - **Important**: $k$ is the same for all requests (known in advance).
  - View/remove the value at the beginning of the queue.

**Solution**:

We will store the first $k$ elements in the head deque `head`, and all the others in the tail deque `tail`:

- Inserting at the end - simply `push_back` in `tail`
  - If `head` contains fewer than $k$ values - then `push_back` in `head`;
- Inserting $k$-th from the beginning:
  - if `head` contains $k$ values - transfer the last element from `head` to the front of `tail`;
  - `push_back` in `head`;
- Viewing the value at the beginning - `front` in `head`.
- Extracting from the beginning:
  - `pop` from `head`;
  - transfer the first element from `tail` to the end of `head`.

#### Example implementation

```cpp
template<typename T>
struct QueuePushK
{
  size_t k;
  std::deque<T> head;
  std::deque<T> tail;

  QueuePushK(size_t k)
  : k(k)
  { }

  bool empty() { return head.empty(); }

  void push(const T& value)
  {
    if (head.size() < k) head.push_back(value);
    else tail.push_back(value);
  }

  void push_k(const T& value)
  {
    if (head.size() == k) {
      tail.push_front(head.back());
      head.pop_back();
    }

    head.push_back(value);
  }

  T front()
  {
    // UB if queue is empty
    return head.front();
  }

  void pop()
  {
    head.pop_front();

    if (!tail.empty())
    {
      head.push_back(tail.front());
      tail.pop_front();
    }
  }
};
```