[Algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Algorithm) - a finite sequence of mathematically rigorous instructions, typically used to solve a class of specific problems or to perform a computation.

## Original problem

Let's imagine a situation: you read a task and quickly came up with a simple algorithm to solve it.

You implemented it in your favorite programming language and then decided to test it.

With small data sets your code worked smoothly.

But when you tried some large data sets - processing became very slow, response time decreased significantly.

Most often, this is due to the insufficient **time efficiency** of your algorithm.

But how can you understand whether your idea is efficient or not?

How can you determine before writing the code that your algorithm will take too long to execute?

**Answer**: estimate the **number of operations** performed by your algorithm.

## Processor clock frequency

One of the important characteristics of a computer is the **[processor clock frequency](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clock_rate)** (measured in hertz).

This value shows how many **clock cycles** the processor can perform per second.

In the simplest approximation, one machine operation corresponds to each clock cycle (but this is not necessarily the case in general).

Modern processors perform **billions of clock cycles** ($10^9$) per second (so their clock frequency is measured in **gigahertz**).

## "Simple" operations

We will call a **simple** operation some "atomic" action in your programming language:

- addition/subtraction;
- comparison for greater/less than;
- conditional statement;
- iteration to the next loop;
- and so on.

### Number of simple operations per second

One simple operation may correspond to one or several machine operations.

For simplification of calculations, an estimate of **hundreds of millions** ($10^8$) of simple operations per second is often used.

**Note**:

- $10^8$ is an approximate **order of magnitude**, not an exact boundary.

## Conclusions

- In the first approximation, it is considered that approximately $10^8$ simple operations are performed per second.
- If the estimated number of operations for your algorithm is lower by a couple of orders of magnitude (for example, $3 \cdot 10^5$), then you could estimate execution time as several milliseconds or even nanoseconds.
- If the estimate is higher by several orders of magnitude (for example, $10^{12}$ or $10^{18}$), then your program will not fit within a second, or even minute or hour.