## Preface

Several relationships between the functions $T(N)$ and $F(N)$ will be considered below.

In this case, $N$ is some abstract integer parameter of the function (in general, there may be several parameters).

The result of the functions $T(N)$ and $F(N)$ will also be an integer.

## "Big O" - estimation of a function from above

Suppose two functions $T(N)$ and $F(N)$ are related as follows:

- it is possible to find a constant $C > 0$ such that
- there exists a positive integer $N_0 > 0$ such that
- $T(N) \le C \cdot F(N)$ for all $N \ge N_0$.

In this case, we introduce the **notation** $T(N) = O(F(N))$.

Essentially, "Big O" is a notation for an **upper estimation** of the function $T(N)$ by the function $F(N)$ as $N$ tends to **infinity**.

### Examples

Let $T(N) = 3 \cdot N^2 + 20$.

#### Example 1

For $F(N) = N^2$, it is **true** that $T(N) = O(F(N))$.

**Proof**:

<details> <summary> </summary>

- Let $C = 4$.
- Consider the inequality $(3 \cdot N^2 + 20) \le 4 \cdot N^2$.
- From this, it follows that $N^2 - 20 \ge 0$.
- The solution to the inequality in positive integers is $N \ge 5$.
- Accordingly, for the given $C = 4$, there exists $N_0 = 5$, such that the inequality holds for all $N \ge N_0$.

Essentially, this means that starting from $N \ge 5$, the expression $4 \cdot N^2$ will be an upper estimation for $(3 \cdot N^2 + 20)$.

</details>

#### Example 2

For $F(N) = N^3$, it is **true** that $T(N) = O(F(N))$.

**Proof**:

<details> <summary> </summary>

- Let $C = 2$.
- Consider the inequality $(3 \cdot N^2 + 20) \le 2 \cdot N^3$.
- It can be shown that this inequality has a solution in positive integers for $N \ge 3$.
- For example, $3 \cdot 4^2 + 20 = 68$, and $2 \cdot 4^3 = 128$.
- Accordingly, for the given $C = 2$, there exists $N_0 = 3$, such that the inequality holds for all $N \ge N_0$.

Essentially, this means that starting from $N \ge 3$, the expression $2 \cdot N^3$ will be an upper estimation for $(3 \cdot N^2 + 20)$.

</details>

#### Example 3

For $F(N) = N$, it is **not true** that $T(N) = O(F(N))$.

**Proof**:

<details> <summary> </summary>

- Consider the inequality $(3 \cdot N^2 + 20) \le C \cdot N$.
- From this, it follows that $3 \cdot N^2 - C \cdot N + 20 \le 0$.
- Since the inequality is quadratic, let's calculate the discriminant $D = C^2 - 4 \cdot 3 \cdot 20$.
- Positive integer solutions to this inequality will satisfy the inequality $N \le \frac{C - \sqrt{D}}{6}$.
- It can be seen that for any chosen constant $C$, there will be an upper limit for $N$, after which the inequality will not hold.

Essentially, this means that for any $C$, the function $C \cdot N$ cannot be an upper estimation for $(3 \cdot N^2 + 20)$ for sufficiently large $N$.

</details>

### Functions with multiple parameters

In general, it can be assumed that "Big O" should work for each parameter independently (or for some combination of them).

Accordingly, in the future, $N$ will be understood as any set of numerical parameters of the algorithm $N_1, N_2, \dots, N_k$.

## Notations similar to "Big O"

Similar to "Big O," there are notations for other types of estimation - [table in the article](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Big_O_notation) on Wikipedia.

### A more accurate view of notation

In fact, the expression $T(N) = O(F(N))$ can be a bit confusing. In this case, there is no explicit equality between functions or anything else.

It is more correct to use the membership operator $T(N) \in O(F(N))$.

Essentially, $O(F(N))$ defines a set of functions united by the common property "the function $F(N)$ is an upper bound estimation for me (the function)."

### "Big Omega" - estimation by a lower bound function

The relationship is similar to "Big O," but for lower bound estimation:

$C \cdot F(N) \le T(N)$ for all $N \ge N_0$.

It is written as $T(N) = \Omega(F(N))$.

#### Example

Let $T(N) = 3 \cdot N^2 + 20$.

In this case, $T(N) = \Omega(100 \cdot N)$ when choosing $C = 1$ and $N \ge 40$.

### "Big Theta" - estimation by a two-sided function

The relationship indicates that both "Big O" and "Big Omega" are satisfied:

$C_1 \cdot F(N) \le T(N) \le C_2 \cdot F(N)$ for all $N \ge N_0$.

It is written as $T(N) = \Theta(F(N))$.

#### Example

Let $T(N) = 3 \cdot N^2 + 20$.

In this case, $T(N) = \Theta(N^2)$ when choosing $C_1 \le 3$ and $C_2 \ge 4$.

## Conclusions

- For functions, upper/lower bounds can be defined as parameters approach infinity.
- Simpler functions can be used for estimations.
- Estimation of function $T(N)$ by function $F(N)$ from above is denoted by $T(N) = O(F(N))$.
- Similarly, $\Omega$ is used for lower bound estimation, and $\Theta$ for two-sided estimation.
- Essentially, expressions of the form $O(F(N))$ define a set of functions for which the function $F(N)$ is an estimation.