# Specific Asymptotics

## O(NlogN) - "polylogarithmic"

### Examples

- Lower bound for sorting algorithms based on pairwise comparisons of elements: **quick** / **merge** / **heap** sort.
- The sum of the harmonic series $\frac{N}{1} + \frac{N}{2} + \dots + \frac{N}{N}$.

**Interestingly**:

In fact, the lower bound for comparison-based sorting is $\log_2{(N!)}$ pairwise comparisons.

### Upper bound N

The operations in solutions with polylogarithmic complexity vary significantly by constant.

**Previously**, $N \le 10^5$ was considered the "standard" limit, but with increasing performance, the boundary has **shifted to** $N \le 3 \cdot 10^5 - 10^6$.

## O(sqrtN) - square root

### Examples

- Finding the divisors of a number $N$;
- The maximum $K$ such that the sum $1 + 2 + \dots + K \le N$.

### Upper bound N

Formally, $N \le 10^{14} - 10^{16}$, but usually in problems with such asymptotic complexity, $N \le 10^{12}$ is encountered.

## O(2^n) - 2 to the power of N

### Examples

- The number of ways to choose a subset of elements from a set of size $N$.
- The number of **subsequences** of a string of length $N$ (since each subsequence is defined by a subset of chosen indices).
- The number of distinct bit (binary) masks of $N$ bits each.
- The number of nodes in a complete binary tree of depth $N$.

### Upper bound N

For pure $O(2^N)$, the standard estimate is $N \le 24 - 26$.

Often in solutions, the asymptotic complexity $O(N \cdot 2^N)$ is encountered, for which the estimate decreases to $N \le 20 - 22$.

## O(N!) - factorial

### Examples

- The product of integers from $1$ to $N$.
- The number of [permutations](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Permutation) for a set of $N$ unique values.

### Upper bound N

A solution with $O(N!)$ is, in the overwhelming majority of cases, a complete enumeration.

For a pure $O(N!)$ solution, an estimate of $N \le 11$ can be used.

Often, enumerations are written as $O(N \cdot N!)$, so the estimate may decrease to $N \le 9 - 10$.