# A Different (?) Look at Arrays

## Sequence

You are probably used to thinking of an array as a sequence of **values**:

- find the maximum **value**;
- find the sum of **values**;
- print **values** in reverse order.

Yes, values are stored in an array in a specific order defined by **indices**, but usually, this is more of a formality or an inevitability of implementation.

Indices themselves typically do not carry any significant semantic weight - they are just a way to access a value, nothing more.

But is it always so?

## Set of Associations (Dictionary)

Let's try to look at an array from the perspective of **indices**.

In this case, an array can be represented as a set of **associations** $(i, a_i)$, where

- $i$ - indices (let's call them **keys**);
- $a_i$ - values associated with the keys.

### Operations with Associations

Let's describe the operations we perform on an array concerning indices (keys):

- `get(key)` - get the value associated with the key.
- `set(key, value)` - set a new association for the given key.
- `size()` - get the total number of stored associations.
- `iterator()` - get an iterator over all stored associations in the form of pairs $(key, value)$.

In general, a data structure that performs such operations is called a "**dictionary**" (or "**associative array**").

### Guarantees within the Dictionary

The dictionary abstraction usually satisfies several guarantees:

- Keys:
  - are **unique** within the dictionary;
  - the memory occupied by the dictionary is **linearly** dependent on the number of keys $N$.
  - the time complexity of iterating through elements is **linearly** dependent on the number of keys $N$.
- Values:
  - there is no uniqueness constraint ($a_i$ can be equal to $a_j$);
  - can have any data type;
  - the memory occupied by the dictionary is **linearly** dependent only on the **data type** of the values.
    - in the case of values stored in dynamic memory, the dictionary itself only stores pointers (which have a fixed size).

## Array-Based Dictionary

A dictionary can be implemented in various ways, but at the moment we will consider an implementation based on an **array**.

The nature of keys as **indices** brings some additional guarantees (constraints):

  - keys must be **non-negative integers**;
  - the number of keys becomes equal to the **maximum key** $N$.
    - if keys $L$ and $R$ are stored in such a dictionary, then all keys $L \le K \le R$ are also stored.

At the same time, there are no additional guarantees on the values.

### Complexity of Operations

- `get(key)` and `set(key)` are performed in $O(1)$;
- `size()` is also in $O(1)$.
- iterating through all elements takes $O(N)$.

## Self-Check Questions

The questions relate to the **array-based dictionary**.

- How much memory does an array of $10^6$ values of type `int` occupy? Round to megabytes.
  - And if there are $10^9$ values? Round to megabytes / gigabytes.
- Estimate the complexity of operations and the memory occupied if the dictionary keys are:
  - integers in the range $[K_L; K_R]$;
    - what changes if $K_L < 0$?
  - squares of natural numbers in the range $[0; N]$ (the squares themselves lie in the range $[0; N^2]$);
  - any ASCII characters;
  - lowercase Latin alphabet characters;
    - lowercase and uppercase characters;
    - strings of two characters from the Latin alphabet.
  - cells of a chessboard.