# Dynamic Memory Management

Most data structures are **dynamic** - that is, they change their size during execution. This leads to the need for dynamic allocation and deallocation of memory - for both arrays and auxiliary structures and classes.

## New and Delete

### New

The most basic way to allocate memory is by using the `new` operator.

Typically, it performs two functions at once:

- requests the allocation of the required amount of dynamic memory;
- calls the constructor of the corresponding type.

#### C++

In C++, `new` is most often implemented through a call to `malloc` in the form of two separate operators:

- `operator new(size_type)` for allocating memory for a single value;
- `operator new[](size_type)` for allocating memory for an array of values.

These operators can be overloaded, but only for the entire code at once.

### Delete

#### C++

In C++, the developer must manually deallocate the memory allocated by the `new` operator using the `delete` operator.

Typically, `delete` performs two functions (similar to `new`):

- calls the destructor;
- frees the memory.

Most often, `delete` is implemented through a call to `free` in the form of analogous operators (for a single value and an array).

Similarly to `new`, these operators can be overloaded, but only for the entire code at once.

#### Java and Python

In these languages, the developer does not need to manually deallocate memory. Instead, automatic memory cleanup occurs through **garbage collectors**.

The main problem with this approach is the inability to directly control when and what will be cleaned up. You can "request" cleanup, but there is no guarantee that it will happen right now.

In the simplest case, the garbage collector keeps track of the number of references to a memory area - when the counter reaches 0, the memory is marked for cleanup. However, modern garbage collectors are implemented through many heuristics for more efficient operation of the entire program.

## Allocator

You may have noticed that `new` / `delete` have two inconveniences:

- they immediately call the constructor;
- they cannot be overridden only for a specific class.

Therefore, when creating `std` data structures, it was proposed to make the template parameter `Allocator`.

Essentially, the idea of an **allocator** is to encapsulate memory allocation and deallocation (note that this is done without calling the constructor / destructor).

Additionally, different allocators can be defined for different data structures, providing greater flexibility.

### std::allocator

C++ provides a standard allocator `std::allocator`:

- it only allocates / deallocates memory for the type specified by the template;
- it does not contain any fields (i.e., _stateless_).

If desired, it can be inherited (if you want to extend functionality a bit), but you can also describe your own allocator completely from scratch.

### Tags

Similarly to iterators, a class allocator is expected to have several tags, such as:

- `value_type`;
- `size_type`;
- `difference_type`.

### Allocator Traits

Before C++ 20, allocators had an extended set of functions, such as:

- `construct` - create an object with a given set of parameters;
- `destroy` - destroy an object.

However, in modern versions of C++, this functionality (as well as some tags) has been moved to `std::allocator_traits<AllocType>`.

Essentially, this allowed allocators to be made as simple and "clean" as possible, performing **exactly one** function.

### Rebind

Many data structures in C++ can use allocators not directly for the stored type of values.

Therefore, they expect the allocator class to have a templated constructor:

```cpp
// allocator has type T

template<typename U>
allocator_class(const allocator_class<U>& other)
{
  // initialize by other
}
```

Thus, they can create the allocator they need based on the one passed in the template.