## C++

In C++, the dynamic array is represented by the class `std::vector<T, Allocator>` with the following set of operations:

- `size` - get the number of elements in the structure.

- `constructor` - create an empty vector with a specified size and (optionally) fill the cells with the same value;
- `resize` - change the number of cells to a specified amount and (optionally) fill the cells with the same value.
- `assign` - set the number of cells to a specified amount and assign the same value / values from a sequence to each cell.

- `operator[]` and `at` - get / change an element by index.

- `push_back` - add a value to the end (copying occurs);
- `emplace_back` - create a value at the end based on a specified set of parameters (without copying);
- `back` - get the value of the last element;
- `pop_back` - remove the last element (returns nothing);

- `front` - get the value of the first element.

- `insert` - insert a value before the specified **iterator**.
- `erase` - remove the element specified by the **iterator**.

- `begin` / `end` - get the iterators of the sequence.

### Helper Functions

All standard functions for sequences are available for `std::vector`.

Also, `std::vector` can be sorted using the `std::sort` operation (works in $O(N \cdot \log{N})$).

### Iterators and Memory

The standard guarantees that the data in the vector is stored contiguously in memory (similar to a regular array).

Therefore, vector iterators are often used similarly to pointers to elements in a regular array.

But **it should be remembered** - when moving elements to a new array, iterators **become invalid**:

```cpp
std::vector<int> a = {1, 2, 3};

for (int it = 0; it < 5; ++it)
{
  auto& it = a.begin();
  a.push_back(*it);
  // possibly invalid iterator
  std::cout << *it << std::endl;
}
```

### vector and string

You may have noticed that `std::string` in C++ behaves similarly to `std::vector`. And this is not just a coincidence.

In fact, these classes have a common ancestor class `std::basic_string`, which implements the main aspects of "dynamic array on an array".

## Java

In Java, the dynamic array interface `List<T>` is available (describes the expected set of operations without implementation details):

- `size` - get the number of elements in the structure.
- `constructor` - may specify the initial value of parameter $C$ (but the size will always be $0$).
- `get` and `set` - get / change an element by index.
- `add` - add a value to the end / at a specified position;
- `remove` - remove a specified value / value from a specified position (the removed value is returned);
- `indexOf` / `lastIndexOf` - find the first / last position of a specified value;
- `iterator` - get an iterator.

The array-based implementation is represented by the class `ArrayList<T>` (the name clearly hints at this).

### Memory Allocation

- For small values of $C$, the parameter $\lambda$ is equal to $1$ (the size increases by $2$ times).

- For values of $C \ge 64$, the parameter $\lambda$ becomes $0.5$ (the size starts increasing by $1.5$ times).

### Useful Functions

Java provides a set of helper functions for working with `List` in the `Collections` class, for example:

- `asList` - convert a set of values / array into an **immutable** `List`.
- `reverse` - reverse the order of elements for a given `List`.
- `sort` - sort the given `List` (in $O(N \cdot \log{N})$).

### ArrayList and String

Unlike C++, `String` in Java is immutable, so their implementations are quite different.

At the same time, there is a similar functional string class `StringBuilder`, designed specifically for multiple modifications of a string.

## Python

The dynamic array is represented by the class `list` (`[]`) with the following functionality:

- `len` - get the number of elements in the structure.
- `operator []` - get / change an element by index.
- `append` - add a value to the end;
- `extend` - add a sequence to the end;
- `remove` - remove the first occurrence of a value;
- `pop` - remove a value from a specified position (by default, the last element);
- `index` / `count` - find the first position / count of elements with a specified value;
- `sort` - sort in ascending / descending order (returns nothing) - works in $O(N \cdot \log{N})$.
- `reverse` - reverse the order of elements (returns nothing).
- `__iter__` - get an iterator.

### Slices

Python supports **slice** syntax for `list` and `str` - obtaining a subarray by a specified half-interval of indices:

```py
a = [2, 4, 1, 5, 3]
b = a[2:4] # b = [1, 5]
```

### Helper Functions

- `sorted` - obtain a sorted copy of any sequence as an object of type `list`.